[Hydrogen docs]: Analytics (#962)
Shopify/hydrogen: packages/hydrogen/src/framework/docs/analytics.md

Hydrogen includes support for analytics that give you insight into how customers are interacting with a custom storefront.

This guide describes the analytic events that Hydrogen emits by default. It also explains how to subscribe to events, configure custom events, send analytic data from the server side, and unsubscribe from events.

## Default analytic events

By default, Hydrogen emits the following analytic events:

- `PAGE_VIEW`: When a customer visits a storefront page

> - `ADD_TOCART`: When a customer adds an item to their cart

Author: ```suggestion
- `ADD_TO_CART`: When a customer adds an item to their cart
```

- `UPDATE_CART`: When a customer updates an item in their cart
- `REMOVE_FROM_CART`: When a customer removes an item from their cart
- `DISCOUNT_CODE_UPDATED`: When a discount code that a customer applies to a cart is updated

The event name constants are available in `ClientAnalytics.eventNames`.

## Subscribe to an analytic event

> You can subscribe to an analytic event to allow your Hydrogen app to listen for the event.
> The following steps describe how to subscribe to the `PAGE_VIEW` analytic event.

Author: ```suggestion
You can subscribe to an analytic event to allow your Hydrogen app to listen for the event. The following steps describe how to subscribe to the `PAGE_VIEW` analytic event.
```

1. Create a new client component in the `/components` directory of your Hydrogen app. For example, `components/AnalyticListener.client.jsx`.

2. In your client component, add the following code to subscribe to the analytic event:

   {% codeblock file, filename: 'components/AnalyticListener.client.jsx' %}

   ```js
   import {ClientAnalytics} from '@shopify/hydrogen/client';

   let init = false;
   export default function AnalyticsListener() {
     useEffect(() => {

>        // Setup common page specific data

Author: ```suggestion
       // Set up common page-specific data
```

           }
         );
         init = true;
       }
     });

     return null;
   }
   ```

   {% endcodeblock %}

3. Add your client component to `App.server.jsx`, the main app component:

   {% codeblock file, filename: 'App.server.jsx' %}

   ```js
   function App({routes}) {
     return (
       <>
         <Suspense fallback={<LoadingFallback />}>...</Suspense>
         <AnalyticsListener />
       </>
     );
   }
   ```

   {% endcodeblock %}

## Configure a custom analytic event

Aside from the [default analytic events](#default-analytic-events) that Hydrogen supports, you can also configure custom analytic events. For example, you might have a promotional banner that displays on multiple pages.

The following example shows how to configure a custom event to track the pages where a promotional banner is being clicked the most:

{% codeblock file, filename: 'components/Banner.client.jsx' %}

```js
<Banner onClick={(event) => {
  ClientAnalytics.publish('select_promotion', {
    creative_name: "Summer Banner",
    creative_slot: "featured_app_1",
    ...
  })
}}
```

{% endcodeblock %}

### Retrieving data from other parts of your Hydrogen app

> Collect analaytic data where you are making queries.
> 
> For example, making collection name and id available when receive `PAGE_VIEW`
> analytic event:

Author: ```suggestion
You can collect analytic data wherever you make queries. For example, you can make `collectionName` and `collectionId` available when you receive the `PAGE_VIEW` analytic event:
```

{% codeblock file, filename: 'collections/[handle].server.js' %}

```js
const {data} = useShopQuery({
  query: QUERY,
  variables: {
    handle,
    country: country.isoCode,
    numProducts: collectionProductCount,
  },
  preload: true,
});

const collection = data.collection;

useServerAnalytics({
  canonicalPageUrl: `/collections/${handle}`,
  collectionName: collection.title,
  collectionId: collection.id,
});
```

{% endcodeblock %}

> You can add to page analytic data from client components as well.

Author: ```suggestion
You can also add to page analytic data from client components:
```

{% codeblock file, filename: '*.client.js' %}

```js
// some.client.jsx
useEffect(() => {
  ClientAnalytics.pushToPageAnalyticData({
    heroBanner: 'hero-1',
  });
});
```

{% endcodeblock %}

> > Note: All `ClientAnalytics.*` function calls must be wrapped in a `useEffect`

Author: ```suggestion
> Note: 
> All `ClientAnalytics.*` function calls must be wrapped in a [`useEffect`](https://reactjs.org/docs/hooks-reference.html#useeffect) hook.
```

To retrieve the data that's available elsewhere in your Hydrogen app, you can add the following code to your server and client components:

{% codeblock file, filename: '*.server.js' %}

```js
const serverDataLayer = useServerAnalytics();
```

> > Note: Do not use the data from `useServerAnalytics()` for rendering. This will cause occasional hydration mismatch.

Author: ```suggestion
> Caution: 
> Don't use the data from `useServerAnalytics()` for rendering. This will cause occasional mismatches during hydration.
```

{% endcodeblock %}

> You can get analytic data from client components too.

Author: ```suggestion
The following example shows how to retrieve analytic data from a client component:
```

{% codeblock file, filename: '*.client.js' %}

```js
ClientAnalytics.getPageAnalyticData();
```

{% endcodeblock %}

> > Note: Do not use the data from `ClientAnalytics.getPageAnalyticData()` for rendering. This will cause occasional hydration mismatch.

Author: ```suggestion
> Caution: 
> Don't use the data from `ClientAnalytics.getPageAnalyticData()` for rendering. This will cause occasional mismatches during hydration.
```

## Send analytic data from the server side

> In order to send analytics from the server-side, do the following:

Author: ```suggestion
To send analytic data from the server-side, complete the following steps:
```

1. Create a client-side analytic listener that makes a fetch call to `__event` endpoint

{% codeblock file, filename: 'components/AnalyticListener.client.jsx' %}

```js
import {ClientAnalytics} from '@shopify/hydrogen/client';

let init = false;
export default function AnalyticsListener() {
  useEffect(() => {
    // Setup common page specific data
    ClientAnalytics.pushToPageAnalyticData({
      userLocale: navigator.language,
    });

    if (!init) {
      // One time initialization
      ClientAnalytics.subscribe(
        ClientAnalytics.eventNames.PAGE_VIEW,
        (payload) => {
          try {
            fetch('/__event', {
              method: 'post',
              headers: {
                'cache-control': 'no-cache',
                'Content-Type': 'application/json',
              },
              body: JSON.stringify(payload),
            });
          } catch (e) {
            // deal with error
          }
        }
      );
      init = true;
    }
  });

  return null;
}
```

{% endcodeblock %}

> 2. Create a server-side analytic connector and pass it into the `serverAnalyticConnectors` config

Author: ```suggestion
2. Create a server-side analytic connector and pass it into the `serverAnalyticConnectors` configuration:
```

{% codeblock file, filename: 'MyServerAnalyticConnector.jsx' %}

```js
export function request(request, data, contentType) {

>   // Deal with your analytic request

Author: ```suggestion
  // Send your analytic request to third-party analytics
```

}
```

{% endcodeblock %}

{% codeblock file, filename: 'App.server.js' %}

```js
import * as MyServerAnalyticConnector from '/components/MyServerAnalyticConnector.jsx'

...

export default renderHydrogen(App, {
  shopifyConfig,
  routes,
  serverAnalyticConnectors: [MyServerAnalyticConnector]
});
```

{% endcodeblock %}

> ### ServerAnalyticConnector request function paramters

Author: ```suggestion
### ServerAnalyticConnector request function parameters
```

> | Parameter   | Type           | Description                            |
> | ----------- | -------------- | -------------------------------------- |
> | request     | Request        | The analytic request object            |
> | data        | Object or Text | The result from `.json()` or `.text()` |
> | contentType | string         | 'json' or 'text'                       |

Author: ```suggestion
| Parameter   | Type           | Description                            |
| ----------- | -------------- | -------------------------------------- |
| `request`    | request        | The analytic request object.            |
| `data`        | object or text | The result from `.json()` or `.text()`. |
| `contentType` | string         | The content type. Valid values: `json` or `text`.                       |
```

// Use the `useServerAnalytics` hook to supply data
// when events are published
useServerAnalytics({
  canonicalPageUrl: `/collections/${handle}`,
  collectionName: collection.title,
  collectionId: collection.id,
});
```

{% endcodeblock %}

You can also capture events in client components. For example, when a customer makes a query, such as adding an item to their cart, or clicking on a promotional banner, you can capture the event in your client component:

{% codeblock file, filename: '*.client.js' %}

```js
// some.client.jsx
useEffect(() => {
  ClientAnalytics.pushToPageAnalyticsData({
    heroBanner: 'hero-1',
  });
});
```

{% endcodeblock %}

> Note:
> All `ClientAnalytics.*` function calls must be wrapped in a [`useEffect`](https://reactjs.org/docs/hooks-reference.html#useeffect) hook.

To retrieve the data that's available elsewhere in your Hydrogen app, you can add the following code to your server components:

{% codeblock file, filename: '*.server.js' %}

```js
const serverDataLayer = useServerAnalytics();
```

> Caution:
> Don't use the data from `useServerAnalytics()` for rendering. This will cause occasional mismatches during hydration.

{% endcodeblock %}

> If you need to trigger a different analytics event on navigation, you can specify a list of analytics events
> to publish in the server analytics:
> 
> {% codeblock file, filename: '*.server.js' %}
> 
> ```js
> const serverDataLayer = useServerAnalytics({
>   publishEventsOnNavigate: [ClientAnalytics.eventNames.VIEWED_PRODUCT],
> });
> ```
> 
> > Caution:
> > Don't use the data from `useServerAnalytics()` for rendering. This will cause occasional mismatches during hydration.
> 
> {% endcodeblock %}

Author: ````suggestion
If you need to trigger different analytics events on navigation, then you can specify a list of analytics events
to publish in your server component:

{% codeblock file, filename: '*.server.js' %}

```js
const serverDataLayer = useServerAnalytics({
  publishEventsOnNavigate: [ClientAnalytics.eventNames.VIEWED_PRODUCT],
});
```

{% endcodeblock %}

> Caution:
> Don't use the data from `useServerAnalytics()` for rendering. This will cause occasional mismatches during hydration.
````

> > Caution:
> > Don't use the data from `useServerAnalytics()` for rendering. This will cause occasional mismatches during hydration.

Author: ```suggestion
```

Hydrogen includes support for analytics that give you insight into how customers are interacting with a custom storefront.

This guide describes how to subscribe to the default events that Hydrogen offers, configure custom events, send analytics data from the server-side, and unsubscribe from events. It also provides example implementations of client analytics connectors, and shows how to write an end-to-end (E2E) for testing analytics connectors.

## How it works

The following diagram describes how analytics data is processed on the server and client in Hydrogen:

![Shows a diagram that describes how analytics data is processed on the server and client in Hydrogen](/assets/custom-storefronts/hydrogen/hydrogen-analytics.png)

1. On the server, the `useServerAnalytics` hook collects data in a single render request.

> 2. On the client, the data is streamed as part of the `Suspense` component. This single render request contains a `dataLayer` output, waits for all queries to complete, and triggers a `PAGE_VIEW` event.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. On the client, the data is streamed as part of the `Suspense` component. This single render request waits for all queries to complete, output the collected data from the server side and triggers a `PAGE_VIEW` event.
```
